The Psychological Roots of Anti-Vaccination Attitudes
A 24-Nation Investigation

Matthew J. Hornsey, Emily A. Harris, and Kelly S. Fielding

University of Queensland

Objective: Strengthening of antivaccination movements in recent decades has coincided with unprecedented
increases in the incidence of some communicable diseases. Many intervention programs work
from a deficit model of science communication, presuming that vaccination skeptics lack the ability to
access or understand evidence. However, interventions focusing on evidence and the debunking of
vaccine-related myths have proven to be either nonproductive or counterproductive. Working from a
motivated reasoning perspective, we examine the psychological factors that might motivate people to
reject scientific consensus around vaccination. To assist with international generalizability, we examine
this question in 24 countries. Methods: We sampled 5,323 participants in 24 countries, and measured
their antivaccination attitudes. We also measured their belief in conspiracy theories, reactance (the
tendency for people to have a low tolerance for impingements on their freedoms), disgust sensitivity
toward blood and needles, and individualistic/hierarchical worldviews (i.e., people’s beliefs about how
much control society should have over individuals, and whether hierarchies are desirable). Results: In
order of magnitude, antivaccination attitudes were highest among those who (a) were high in conspiratorial
thinking, (b) were high in reactance, (c) reported high levels of disgust toward blood and needles,
and (d) had strong individualistic/hierarchical worldviews. In contrast, demographic variables (including
education) accounted for nonsignificant or trivial levels of variance. Conclusions: These data help
identify the “attitude roots” that may motivate and sustain vaccine skepticism. In so doing, they help shed
light on why repetition of evidence can be nonproductive, and suggest communication solutions to that
problem.

Keywords: vaccination, conspiracy beliefs, health communication, attitude roots
Supplemental materials: http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/hea0000586.supp

For the first time in a century, incidences of some communicable
diseases—such as measles, mumps and pertussis—are on the
increase in the United States (World Health Organization, 2017).
Many commentators lay the blame for this epidemiological outbreak
on an increase in anti-immunization activism, and the associated
drop in immunization rates in some communities (Betsch,
Renkewitz, Betsch, & Ulshöfer, 2010; van Panhuis et al., 2013).
As a result, finding ways to overcome fears and myths about
vaccinations has been an urgent priority for both health professionals
and for researchers interested in science communication
(Fischhoff & Scheufele, 2014).

When science communicators encounter an individual who
holds attitudes in violation of scientific evidence, the most tempting
and intuitive response is to keep repeating the evidence, and to
do so as clearly and deftly as possible (i.e., explication). Epistemologically,
this is satisfying: it is the defining mission of many
scientists to defend facts and to defeat mis-information, and explication
is consistent with that mission. It is also likely that, for
people who are new to an issue or who have a genuinely open
mind, explication is effective.
However, when it comes to converting skeptics, it is widely
understood that there are limitations to this approach (Bain, Hornsey,
Bongiorno, & Jeffries, 2012; Hart & Nisbt, 2012). First, the
process of explication implies that the key problem with those who
hold antivaccination attitudes is lack of exposure to information, or
failure to understand information (the so-called deficit model of
science communication). But there is no clear evidence for this:
people who hold antivaccination attitudes are often no less educated
than others (Larson, Jarrett, Eckersberger, Smith, & Paterson,
2014), and tend to spend a relatively large amount of time
seeking information on the Internet about vaccinations (Jones et
al., 2012).

Second, there is limited evidence that repeating evidence makes
a demonstrable difference to the beliefs and behaviors of those
who hold antivaccination attitudes. One approach has been to
highlight antivaccination myths, and then to refute them with
evidence. But a recent experiment conducted on 315 Americans
suggested that the provision of corrective information had no
significant effect on their vaccination attitudes (Horne, Powell,
Hummel, & Holyoak, 2015). Other studies suggest the potential
for boomerang effects. For example, two experiments on German
This article was published Online First February 1, 2018.
Matthew J. Hornsey and Emily A. Harris, School of Psychology, University
of Queensland; Kelly S. Fielding, School of Communication and
Arts, University of Queensland.
The work reported in the current paper was supported by funding from
the Australian Research Council (DP120100961).

Community members showed that extreme risk negation messages
resulted in increased perceptions of vaccination risk (Betsch &
Sachse, 2013). In another study, Americans were exposed to an
intervention in which they were exposed to either (a) corrective
information about the lack of evidence that the measles-mumpsrubella
(MMR) vaccine causes autism, (b) text describing the
dangers of the diseases prevented by MMR, (c) images of children
suffering from diseases that can be prevented by MMR vaccine, or
(d) a narrative describing the near-death experience of an infant
who contracted measles (Nyhan, Reifler, Richey, & Freed, 2014).
Compared to a control group, none of the interventions significantly
improved participants’ intentions to vaccinate a future child.
In fact, participants who entered into the experiment with relatively
low favorability toward vaccines showed lower intentions to
vaccinate in the corrective information condition than the control
condition.

The low effectiveness of information campaigns on people who
are skeptical of vaccines can be explained through the lens of
motivated reasoning (Browne, Thomson, Rockloff, & Pennycook,
2015). The principle of explication assumes that evidence drives
attitudes. But increasingly researchers understand that the path also
works the other way around: people develop an attitude— often
through intuitions, emotions, and “gut” responses that are difficult
for them to articulate (Haidt, 2001; Slovic, Finucane, Peters, &
MacGregor, 2004) – and are motivated to search for evidence to
support their attitude. In this process of motivated reasoning,
evidence is sampled and critiqued selectively in order to reinforce
what one wants to believe (Kunda, 1990). Weak, circumstantial or
hearsay evidence is embraced to the extent that it reinforces the
conclusion that one is motivated to reach. In contrast, scholarly
evidence that is inconvenient or inconsistent with one’s preferred
conclusion can be discarded as corrupt, incorrect or irrelevant.
Repeating evidence is not going to be effective for these people
because it fails to address the underlying reason why they are
processing the information in a biased way in the first place.
From this perspective, the key question is not “Why would
people reject the evidence about vaccinations?” but rather “Why
would people want to reject the evidence about vaccinations”? The
“attitude roots” model of science rejection seeks to elucidate these
underlying motivations (Hornsey & Fielding, 2017). The authors
use a tree metaphor to explain this process. Above the surface—the
leaves and branches in the metaphor - are the beliefs, myths and
concerns that people hold (e.g., about vaccination). It is these
“surface attitudes” that people see and hear, and that are the targets
of the interventions described above. But according to the attitude
roots model it is what is underneath the surface that is most
important: the underlying fears, identity issues and worldviews
that motivate people to embrace the surface attitudes. It is these
“attitude roots” that lend the surface attitudes power (in the sense
of holding the beliefs strongly), and stability (in that they allow the
attitudes to survive in the face of contradictory evidence). Four of
the attitude roots discussed in that theory paper form the basis for
this paper: Conspiratorial beliefs, disgust sensitivity, reactance,
and individualistic/hierarchical worldviews.

Conspiratorial Beliefs

There are a number of conspiracy beliefs that are circulated
among antivaccination websites: most prevalent is the notion that
Big Pharma and other vested interests exaggerate the benefits of
vaccines and fail to report the dangers (Jolley & Douglas, 2014).
For some, however, individual conspiracy beliefs are not held in
isolation, but rather emerge from a unitary “conspiracist” worldview:
that it is common for shadowy networks of people with
malevolent intentions to execute mass hoaxes on the public in
near-perfect secrecy. People who feel this is the way the world
works—and for whom this worldview provides a neat way to
order, predict and make sense of the universe—might be motivated
to believe conspiracies about science, with negative impacts on
vaccination intentions. Indeed, there is evidence from an online
American sample that people’s willingness to endorse conspiracies
generally (e.g., about the assassination of John F. Kennedy or the
death of Princess Diana) are positively correlated with a range of
“anti-science” attitudes, including antivaccination attitudes (Lewandowsky,
Gignac, & Oberauer, 2013; see also Lewandowsky,
Oberaruer, & Gignac, 2013).

Disgust

According to the model of attitude roots, (sub)clinical fears and
phobias can underpin some antiscience beliefs. For example, some
people have heightened disgust reactions to needles, hospitals and
blood. People who experience these heightened disgust reactions
might be tempted to develop a set of attitudes that gives them
permission to avoid the triggers for their disgust; for example a
rejection of techno-medical interventions, and a skepticism or
hesitancy toward immunizations. Consistent with this notion, there
is evidence that disgust sensitivity correlates with people’s beliefs
about trust-sensitive scientific advances such as attitudes toward
vaccination (Clay, 2017) and genetically modified foods (Scott,
Inbar, & Rozin, 2016).
Reactance

The “value-expressive” function of an attitude captures the
capacity of an attitude to communicate to yourself and others the
type of person that you would like to be. According to the model
of attitude roots, one function that “anti-science” beliefs might
have is to establish one’s reputation as a nonconformist; someone
who is skeptical of consensus views and intolerant of people
telling them how to think (i.e., as someone high in reactance;
Brehm & Brehm, 1981). To the extent that people nurture this
self-image, they may be motivated to reject consensus views (like
“immunization is good”) as a short-hand way of communicating a
nonconformist identity to the self and others.
Individualism—Hierarchy Worldviews
The theory of cultural cognition makes the case that culturally
ingrained ideological orientations shape appraisals of risk, evidence,
and scientific consensus (Kahan, 2010). The theory focuses
on two types of worldviews: individualism/communitarianism and
hierarchialism/egalitarianism. The individualism construct focuses
on the extent to which people think it is preferable for individuals
to make decisions for themselves, as opposed to society and
government making decisions for individuals. The hierarchialism
construct focuses on the extent to which people think that hierarchies
and power differences are natural and healthy parts of
society, as opposed to thinking that society needs more equality
and egalitarianism. Although they are distinct constructs, theory
and research shows that they share certain attitudinal correlates.
For example, people who subscribe to relatively individualistic and
hierarchical values are more inclined to value commerce and free
enterprise, and so are motivated to believe that “big government”
is a problem. In contrast, people who subscribe to relatively
egalitarian and communitarian values are more likely to have a
moral suspicion of “big business”, and so are motivated to embrace
the risk that commerce and free enterprise present to the environment
and to people (Kahan, 2010). Although these ideological
variables have been shown to have a robust relationship with some
“anti-science” beliefs (e.g., climate skepticism; Hornsey, Harris,
Bain, & Fielding, 2016) the link with vaccination attitudes is less
clear. On one hand it is possible that moral suspicion of big
business would generalize to a moral suspicion of “Big Pharma”,
which in turn would be associated with a skepticism or hesitancy
toward vaccinations. On the other hand, it is possible that immunization
might be viewed as an excessive “big government” initiative,
and so be treated with skepticism by those high in individualist
and hierarchical worldviews. Consistent with this, hierarchical beliefs
are associated with higher perceptions of HPV vaccine risk (Kahan,
Braman, Cohen, Gastil, & Slovic, 2010), and vaccine support is
negatively correlated with belief in the free market (Lewandowsky,
Gignac, & Oberauer, 2013).
In sum, the notion of attitude roots allows for a fresh perspective
on what the barriers to vaccination uptake might be: away from
beliefs and concerns, and toward the underlying factors that motivate
those beliefs and concerns. However, there is only a small
body of work that has examined the empirical case for whether
these attitude roots are implicated in antivaccination attitudes.
Where the links have been drawn— between anti-immunization
beliefs and disgust sensitivity (Clay, 2017) and conspiratorial
beliefs (Lewandowsky, Gignac, & Oberauer, 2013) - they have
been examined in single-nation (American) data sets. This restricted
geographical reach means that it is difficult to extrapolate
conclusions to nonindustrialized nations, where the benefits of
immunization are acute, but where skepticism of technomedical
interventions can be relatively high. The existing studies also
examined attitude roots in isolation, without controlling for other
relevant attitude roots. The current study draws on community
samples from 24 nations, allowing us for the first time to examine
the extent to which each of these attitude roots uniquely predict
antivaccination attitudes, and to do so with a global empirical
reach. Drawing on extant theory and research, we test the prediction
that antivaccination attitudes would be associated with more
conspiratorial beliefs, higher levels of disgust, greater reactance,
and stronger individualistic and hierarchical worldviews.

Method

Data were collected between March 31 and May 11, 2016, using
the data collection company Survey Sampling International (SSI).
Before beginning the survey, potential participants were asked
“what country do you live in?” Respondents were screened out of
the study if they stated that they lived in a nation other than the
nation being sampled (n  692). Participants with more than 90%
data points missing (participant drop-outs) were also excluded
from analyses (n  60). This left 5323 usable participants. Sample
size was determined to ensure that each of the samples met or
exceeded the recommended sample sizes for reliable correlations
(Bonett & Wright, 2000). For demographic information broken
down by sample, see Supplemental Table S1 online.
SSI was chosen due to their emphasis on representativeness of
panel respondents, whereby their global panel comprises relatively
representative distributions of gender and age. As can be seen in
Supplemental Table S1, our sample was indeed representative for
gender (49.9% female). Given that participants needed to be 18 or
over to complete the survey, one would expect that our sample
would be somewhat older than the population of the respective
countries. Even so, the median ages of our samples were, on
average, only 4.32 years older than the median age of the respective
national populations. One limitation of online samples is that
they tend to be more educated than the general population. Overrepresentation
of tertiary educated people among the 16 OECD
nations in our sample was relatively modest (on average, there was
only a 4.01% difference between the percentage of tertiary educated
participants in our sample and the percentage of tertiary
educated people in the respective populations of the 16 OECD
nations). For non-OECD nations, however, the overrepresentation
of educated participants was more pronounced. In order to address
the potential issues associated with our sampling, we included
demographic factors such as education, age, and gender as control
variables in key analyses. As will be elaborated below, however, it
should be noted that age and education did not have a significant
unique relationship with antivaccination attitudes.
The choice of 24 nations was constrained partly by the ability of
SSI to reach a satisfactory sample in the relevant nation; consequently,
countries with very little Internet penetrations are not
represented in the survey. In addition to the 24 countries we also
collected a sample from Hong Kong: Hong Kong is an autonomous
territory within China, and in our analyses we distinguished
between this sample and the sample from mainland China. In
choosing countries, we were also mindful of ensuring a broad
cross-section of geographical regions (six continents are represented)
and cultural orientations (we aimed to have a broad spread
of both individualistic and collectivist cultures, e.g.). Participants
who did not self-identify as members of the requested nations were
excluded from the study. Participants received monetary compensation
for their time, which was determined by SSI and adjusted
for each country, such that the purchasing power of each reimbursement
was consistent across countries.

Materials

Measures of antivaccination attitudes, conspiratorial beliefs, disgust,
reactance, and individualism/hierarchical worldviews are
summarized below; the full list of items can be found in the
supplemental materials online. As can be seen there, some items
were adapted to avoid colloquialisms and other culture-specific
words and concepts. Questionnaires were translated into the native
language of non-English speaking samples using translation/backtranslation
procedures: concerns about comprehension and translatability
were flagged and addressed during that process. The four
predictors were presented in a randomized order. The predictors
were followed by a measure of the outcome variable (vaccination
PSYCHOLOGICAL ROOTS OF ANTI-VACCINATION ATTITUDES 309
attitudes) and finally by demographics. This research was approved
by the Behavioral and Social Sciences Ethical Review
Committee of the University of Queensland (ethics clearance
#2015000181).
Conspiratorial beliefs. Of the conspiratorial beliefs used by
Lewandowsky, Gignac, and Oberauer (2013), we measured four
that we considered to have worldwide recognition: conspiracies
surrounding the assassination of President John Kennedy, the
death of Princess Diana, the existence of a New World Order, and
American government knowledge of the 9/11 terrorist attacks.
Participants rated their agreement with the conspiracy statement on
a 5-point scale (1  strongly disagree; 5  strongly agree) but
with a sixth option for people who “don’t know.” Participants
choosing the “don’t know” option were treated as missing values
on this scale. Mean scores for the individual conspiracy beliefs
ranged from slightly above the midpoint (JFK: M  3.44) to
slightly below (9/11 and New World Order: Ms both  2.78).
Consistent with the notion of conspiracy beliefs forming part of a
unitary worldview, endorsement of each conspiracy theory was
positively correlated and so the four items were combined into a
single scale (  .81).
Disgust. Disgust was measured using the “blood and injection”
subscale of the Disgust Emotion Scale (Olatunji, Sawchuk,
de Jong, & Lohr, 2007). Participants rated the extent to which they
would feel disgust or repugnance if they were exposed to 6 objects
or events including “A small vial of your blood” and “receiving an
anesthetic injection in the mouth” (1  no disgust or repugnance
at all; 5  extreme disgust or repugnance). Scores were combined
into a highly reliable scale (  .90).
Reactance. Reactance was measured using a selection of
items from the Hong Psychological Reactance Scale (Hong &
Page, 1989). On a 5-point scale (1  strongly disagree; 5
strongly agree) participants rated their level of agreement with five
statements such as: “I find contradicting others stimulating” and “I
consider advice from others an intrusion.” Higher scores reflect
greater dispositional reactance (  .64).
Individualism— hierarchy worldview. The cultural cognition
dimensions were measured using the Cultural Cognition Worldview
Scale (Kahan et al., 2010). Individualism-communitarianism was
measured with 17 items including “The government interferes far too
much in our everyday lives” and “It’s society’s responsibility to make
sure everyone’s basic needs are met” (reversed). Hierarchyegalitarianism
was measured with 13 items including “We have gone
too far in pushing equal rights in this country” and “Our society would
be better off if the distribution of wealth was more equal” (reversed).
All items were responded to on a 6-point scale (1  strongly disagree;
6  strongly agree) and each scale displayed adequate internal
consistency (s  .68 and .61, respectively). However, the scales
were significantly correlated, r  .32, p  .001. Thus, to avoid these
variables competing with each other for unique variance in the regression
model, we combined the two scales into a single measure of
individualism/hierarchy (at the top end of the scale) and communitarianism/egalitarianism
(at the bottom end of the scale).
Attitudes toward vaccinations. Attitudes toward vaccinations
were measured using seven items from the Beliefs About
Vaccine Safety and Efficacy subscale of the Parent Attitudes
About Vaccines Scale (Opel et al., 2011). Participants rated how
much they agreed with four statements about vaccine safety and
efficacy, including “Children get more vaccinations than are good
for them” and “It is better for children to get fewer vaccinations all
at the one time” (1  strongly disagree, 5  strongly agree). They
also rated how concerned they were about three issues associated
with vaccinations, such as “that any one of the childhood vaccines
might not be safe” and “that a vaccine might not prevent the
disease.” For the last three items participants responded on a
5-point scale from 1 (not at all concerned) to 5 (very concerned)
but with a sixth item to register that the item was “not applicable”
(scores of 6 were treated as missing values). Note that, although
the items assess intentions to vaccinate children, they do not
presuppose that participants have children themselves. The items
were combined into a single scale, with high scores indicating high
levels of concern about the safety and effectiveness of vaccines
(  .71). However, removal of the one negatively worded item
(“Many of the illnesses that vaccines prevent are severe”) resulted
in a substantial increase in reliability (  .77) and so we analyzed
the 6-item scale.

Analytic Plan

We calculated bivariate relationships by conducting a series of
meta-analyses across the 25 samples using the metafor package
(Viechtbauer, 2010). All effect sizes were weighted by sample size
and calculated using random-effects estimation, specifically, the
restricted maximum-likelihood estimation. We then conducted a
regression analysis to examine the unique predictive power of each
of our variables. To account for the nesting of individuals within
countries, we used the lme4 package (Bates, Mächler, Bolker, &
Walker, 2015) to conduct mixed-effects modeling (i.e., modeling
both within- and between-country variance and covariance). All
predictor variables were measured at the individual level (i.e.,
Level 1) and were group-mean centered at the country level.

Means and Bivariate Correlations

Means and standard deviations within each of the 25 samples
are summarized in Table 1. The mean score for the overall sample
suggests slightly above-midpoint concerns about the safety and
efficacy of vaccination (M  3.26). The scores on antivaccination
attitudes were reasonably normally distributed, with 14.8% reporting
strong antivaccination attitudes (M  4.01), 39.2% reporting
moderately strong antivaccination attitudes (M  3.01– 4), 36.2%
reporting moderately strong provaccination attitudes (M  2.01–
3); and 9.8% reporting strong provaccination attitudes (M  2 or
below). As can be seen in Table 1, the strongest antivaccination
attitudes tended to be in Asia, and the weakest antivaccination
attitudes tended to be in the West.
Figures 1– 4 detail country-level correlations between antivaccination
attitudes and conspiratorial beliefs, reactance, disgust, and
individualism-hierarchy. Table 2 summarizes correlations among
variables after being pooled across the 25 samples (indices of crosssample
variability are in Supplemental Table S2 online). Analysis of
the pooled correlations showed that antivaccination attitudes featured
in significant bivariate relationships with all four of our predictors.
The strongest pattern was that participants who displayed more conspiratorial
beliefs held more antivaccination attitudes, r  .334, p 
.001. As can be seen in Figure 1, this relationship emerged signifi-
310 HORNSEY, HARRIS, AND FIELDING
cantly in all 25 samples, and seemed to be particularly strong among
Western nations (e.g., Australia, Canada, Germany, U.K., U.S.A.).
The next most consistent relationship was with reactance: the more
people reported resisting influence and incursions on their freedom,
the more they held antivaccination attitudes, r  .235, p  .001. This
relationship was significant in 22 of 25 samples (see Figure 2).
Stronger antivaccination attitudes were also found among those who
experience relatively high levels of disgust about blood and injections,
a relationship that was significant in 17 of 25 cultures (r  .201, p 
.001; see Figure 3). Finally, antivaccination attitudes were stronger the
more participants endorsed an individualistic/hierarchical worldview,
r  .186, p  .001. Although this effect was relatively consistent
across samples (20 of 25 samples, Figure 4) it was the weakest
relationship in terms of effect size.
It is notable that these psychological predictors accounted for more
variance than demographic factors. Strikingly, analysis of the pooled
correlations showed that education had no significant relationship
with vaccination attitudes, r  .009, p  .646; neither did gender,
r  .012, p  .472. Younger, r  .046, p  .012 participants were
significantly more skeptical, although this relationship accounted for
a very small amount of variance. More conservative participants, r
.102, p  .001 also had stronger antivaccination attitudes.
Mixed-Effects Regression Modeling
Mixed-effects regression modeling was used to examine the unique
predictive power of each of our variables. The intraclass correlation
(ICC  0.12) shows that within-country variation accounted for 88%
of the total variance in antivaccination attitudes. Model 1 estimated
the fixed effects of reactance, conspiratorial beliefs, individualismhierarchy,
and disgust on attitudes toward vaccinations, controlling
for differences in scores and relationships across countries (random
intercepts and slopes, see Table 3). Conspiratorial beliefs were the
strongest predictor of antivaccination attitudes, followed by reactance,
disgust, and individualism-hierarchy, all ps  .001. Hence, participants
scoring higher on conspiratorial beliefs, disgust, reactance, and
individualism-hierarchy were more likely to hold antivaccination attitudes.
Model 2 added fixed effects of age, gender, education, and
political ideology (the sample size for this final model was 4688,
with 12% of the sample excluded due to missing values on one or
more of the measured variables). The effects of conspiratorial
beliefs, reactance, disgust, and individualism-hierarchy were
almost identical to those reported for Model 1 (see Table 3).
Conspiratorial beliefs were again the strongest predictor of
antivaccination attitudes, followed by reactance, disgust, and
individualism-hierarchy, all ps  .001. Political ideology significantly
predicted antivaccination attitudes such that more conservative
participants were more likely to hold antivaccination attitudes,
p  .001. Age, gender, and education were nonsignificant
predictors of antivaccination attitudes, ps  .178.

Discussion

An advantage of doing this is that
it opens up novel opportunities to promote vaccination intentions,
ones that do not rely on repeating evidence.
According to the attitude roots model, one way to create change is
to identify underlying motives for rejecting the science on immunization,
and then to tailor interventions that are congenial to those
underlying motivations (the so-called jiu jitsu approach; Hornsey &
Fielding, 2017). From this perspective, the goal of science communication
is to align with people’s underlying fears, ideologies and
identities, thus reducing people’s motivation to reject the science. If
the motivation to reject the science is reduced, then people should
become more willing to embrace the evidence on its merits.
The current data identified three underlying attitude roots that
are meaningfully implicated in antivaccination attitudes: conspiratorial
beliefs, reactance, and disgust/fear toward blood
and needles (the fourth predictor—individualistic/hierarchical
worldviews— explained only a small amount of variance and so
will not be discussed further). The particularly strong role of
conspiratorial beliefs helps contextualize why corrective information
and myth-busting about vaccinations has tended to be
either ineffective or counterproductive. For most people, official
health messages asserting a scientific consensus about
vaccination are reassuring and imply an underlying reality (the
“consensus implies correctness” heuristic). But for those who
have a conspiratorial worldview, these same ingredients— official
pronouncements that imply a lack of dissent or that the
“science is in”— can be inverted to be proof of a conspiracy.
From a jiu jitsu approach it is counterproductive to try to reduce
people’s conspiratorial thinking (and there is no evidence that
this is feasible). Rather, one should work with people’s underlying
worldviews: to acknowledge the possibility of conspiracies,
but to show how vested interests can conspire to obscure
the benefits of vaccination and to exaggerate the dangers.
Similar methods might be possible for the other two predictors
identified in this paper. It might not be feasible to reduce people’s
levels of reactance. But it might be possible to align vaccination
messages with that individual difference factor, by implying that
antivaccination movements are high-pressure, highly conformist
organizations in which individual freedoms are discouraged. For
those who have high disgust toward needles and blood, avoidance
of vaccination is a short-term anxiety reduction strategy. But
interventions may be able to disable that strategy by reminding
people of the consequences of disease in terms of hospitalization,
illness symptoms, and exposure to surgery, blood and needles.
This may help explain why, of the interventions tested by Nyhan
and colleagues (2014), among the most effective (or least noneffective)
in terms of vaccination intentions was exposure to dramatic
narratives and images about children suffering from measles.
Figure 1. Relationship between conspiratorial beliefs and antivaccination
attitudes across 25 samples. Effect sizes to the right indicate larger correlations.
Figure 2. Relationship between reactance and antivaccination attitudes
across 25 samples. Effect sizes to the right indicate larger correlations.

Limitations and Future Directions

Like most samples collected over the Internet, our sample is
likely restricted to people with relatively high levels of literacy. As
noted earlier, the current samples tended to overrepresent highly
educated individuals, and as such the generalizability of the effects
to less-educated people is not clear.
Given the cross-sectional nature of our design, causal interpretations
of the data are speculative. To reduce the possibility that the
significant relationships are artifacts of latent third variables, we
have controlled for demographic factors such as age, gender,
education, and political ideology. However, we are also mindful of
the possibility that the relationships reflect examples of reverse
causation. For example, it is plausible that someone who had an
experience that triggered vaccine hesitance would then develop
more general conspiratorial beliefs as they are exposed to conspiratorial
material about vaccinations. In the future, issues of causality
might best be addressed through large-scale longitudinal surveys.
Our outcome measure is an attitudinal measure; we have no
measures of intentions or behaviors around vaccination uptake.
Theoretically, we believe that the psychology underpinning antivaccination
attitudes is an interesting question in its own right.
However, we acknowledge that attitudes are an imperfect proxy
for behaviors, and care should be taken not to presume that one
necessarily leads to the other. Future studies would benefit from
having more explicit measures of behaviors. In so doing, it would
also be of value to nuance between parents and nonparents in terms
of their vaccination decisions, an issue that lay outside the scope of
the current analysis.
We also acknowledge that there are pragmatic challenges
associated with the jiu jitsu style of persuasion described earlier.
Given that no single message can canvass all of the
possible underlying motivations for rejecting science, jiu jitsu
persuasion relies on diverse messages delivered through multiple
channels to appeal to different segments of the population.
The attraction of tailored messaging is clear, but we emphasize
that the success of jiu jitsu persuasion rests on marketing and
technological sophistication as much as it relies on psychological
understanding.
On the question of communication strategy, we acknowledge
that some of the effects reported here—while statistically significant—are
small. Disgust, for example, accounts for less than
10% of variance in antivaccination attitudes in all but two
countries (see Figure 3). Furthermore, although conspiratorial
beliefs share a reliable and significant relationship with antivaccination
attitudes across all 25 samples, inspection of Figure
1 shows that the effects in some cultures (particularly in Asia
and South America) are modest in size. This suggests that
conspiracy-related interventions may be less of a priority in
these cultures than in the industrialized West. However, it
Figure 3. Relationship between disgust and antivaccination attitudes
across 25 samples. Effect sizes to the right indicate larger correlations.
Figure 4. Relationship between individualism-hierarchy and antivaccination
attitudes across 25 samples. Effect sizes to the right indicate larger
correlations.

It should also be noted that some of the relationships in the rich,
industrialized Western nations are relatively large: in Australia,
Canada, Germany, New Zealand, U.K. and the U.S.A., knowing
people’s beliefs about conspiracies in general helps account for
17–27% of variance in antivaccination attitudes. This is a
nontrivial amount of explanatory power, particularly since this
measure does not make any reference to vaccinations or healthrelated
beliefs.

In sum, the current results suggest new understandings of the
psychological factors that motivate people to want to reject the
science on vaccinations. Understanding these underlying motivations
opens up new possibilities in terms of promoting more vaccination
uptake, interventions that work in alignment with (rather than against)
the effects of motivated reasoning on people’s ability to embrace
counterattitudinal information.